@ cognism

The B2B Sales Process    Hand book

Con  tent  

04  / Introducing the B2B sales process

05 / Why should you  f o l l o w  a  B2B sales process?

06  /  The 8 stages of the  
B2B sales process  

07 /  

1 - Rese arch  

08 / 2 - Discovery  

13 / 3 - Qualification  

15 / 4 - Demo nstration  

20 / 5 - Objection handling  
25 / 6 - Closing  

26 / 7 - Follow up  

27 / 8 - F e e d b a c k  

29 /  Contact Cognism today  

8 Me  

Introducing the B2B sales process  

It’s Monday morning.  

That super star SDR has booked a   new meeting in your calendar.  

“Ah, good,” you say to yourself. “Time to sit back and relax.”  

...said no account exec, ev er!  

The best AEs know that if they want that meeting to suc ceed, then they have to get to work, straight away. They have to improve their know ledge. They have to get to kn ow their prospect better.  
They have to fol low a process.  

But what is that process?  

We asked our business development team for their insights. How do they manage the hard job of B2B sales, from researching pros pects to conducting demos and closing business?  

They gave us their answers...and then we put them all together in this eBoo k.  

We know that time is mon ey is B2B sales, so we’ll stop wasting yours.  

Prepare yourself for the best biz dev guide you’ll read this year.  

Strap your selves in, we’re ready to lau nch!  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 4  
Why should you follow a B2B sales process?  

Most salespeople en joy the freedom that comes with their role. The ability to bring their personality to every demo and adapt to changing conver sations.  

However, the best sales people aren’t artists - they’re scient ists. They use B2B data to form insights and optimize their work.  

A B2B sales process provides a framework upon which a sales person can improvis e, while providing 4 additional benefits:  

1.  

2.  

Having a more rigid process in place makes it easier for new starters to get up to date.  

Breaking a sales strategy into stages makes it easier to identify aspects which aren’t working, and adjust them.  

4.  

3.  

Seeing where customers are in the sales process makes it easier to forecast more accurately.  

Having a more structured sales approach makes it impossible to overlook im portant steps.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 5  
The 8 stages of the B2B sales process  

What does the B2B sales process look like for Cognism’s AEs? These are the 8 stages they follow:  

F e d b a c k  Researc h  w up ollo F  D i s c o v e r y  C l o s i n g  O bjection handling  D e m o n s t r a tio n  

Now it’s time for the good stuff - let’s explore each of the 8 stages in detail.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 6  
1 - Research  

Here’s a frighten ing statistic:  

86% of B2B buyers say they see “no real difference bet ween suppliers.”  

With so much cho ice available to customers, it’s more important than ever for AEs/BDMs to make a genuine connection with pros pects and clearly display how their product can help change their lives.  

Tho rough research, before you run a demo, is your route to achieving this. This research phase can help you determine whether or not your product is a good fit for the buyer.  

Follow these 3 steps:  

STEP Connect with  Visit the  Read up on the the prospect  company website  latest industry news on LinkedIn  ACTIVITIES  • Click onto their  • Look for any news  • Subscribe to LinkedIn profile.  updates or recent  industry news  • Check for articles/  press releases.  websites or posts that they  • Scroll through the LinkedIn groups.  have commented  company’s blog  • Pay attention on or shared.  (if they have one).  to industry  • Look over their  • Create a list of the  trends, especially career history  technology that  with emerging and any personal  the company uses.  products/ milestones, e.g.:  technology.  awards, event appearances.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 7  
OUTCOME  

OUTCOME  

Make a note of  Make a note of anything useful  recent company that will help you  events/milestones build rapport on  and the language/ your demo.  terms the company uses.  

With this know ledge, you will sound like an expert in their field - helping you to build trust with the prospect.  

“Research is a crit ical phase in the B2B sales process. You don’t want to waste time or appear unprepared by asking questions when the answers are readily avail able online. Also, if you can show the prospect that you’ve taken the time to research their business thoroughly, that will go a long way to establishing trust.”  

Jonathan Ilett, Sales Director, Cognism  
2 - Discovery  

2 more stats for you, courtesy of Sales Benchmark Index:  

Demos conducted without discovery are 73% less successful than demos conducted with.  

Salespeople who tie their demos to specific pain points are 35% more likely to win a deal.  

So, now you know how important discovery is. But what is it?  

The purpose of discovery is to uncover your prospect’s existing processes and any pain points they may have. The idea is to start a con versation with  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 8  

them and identify exactly how your product can fit into their current workflow and improve it.  

The discovery phase can be conducted either over an exploratory “dis covery call” before the demo is scheduled, or in the early stage of the demo itself.  

If possible, we recommend having a discovery call with the prospect, separate from the demo. Our business development team shared the following steps.  
Step 1 - Identify goals  

When your discovery call starts, the first thing you need to do is identify goals. These are:  

The company’s short-term and long-term sales strategy goals.  

The prospect’s indi vidual goals.  

Ask the prospect questions that reveal this information. Their answers will be your basis for further discovery. Keep them in your mind as the call progresses. How will your product help the prospect and their company achieve these goals?  

“It’s important to be precise. Focus on met rics and get percentages if possib le. Establish quantity. For example, you can ask a questi 7on like: how much are you looking to increase your net new bookings? Then you can tie the prosp ect’s answers to the results that your product can del iver.”  


Saif Khan Senior Busin ess Developmen  t Manager, Cognism  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 9  
Step 2 - Identify pain points  

The prospect has investigated your company beca use they have business challenges they want to overco me. For some, the pain they’re feeling may be hard to define.  

Guess what? It’s the salesperson’s role during the discover y call to explain their pain!  

The best way of doing this is to ask open-ended questions about the prospect and their busi ness. Get the prospect talking more and they’ll soon realise what their own pain points are.  

Open-ended que stions are questions that don’t require a simple “yes or “no” answ er. Here are some examples, straight from the Cognism sales playbook:  

What was the reason for you joining me on this call today? What prompted you to explore our solution?  

How big is your 222 team?  

What are your core KPIs?  

Have you used a data provider before? If so, was it success ful and why?  

What are the goals that your company is working towards?  

What’s the biggest challenge your comp any is facing right now?  

What’s prevented you from reliev  ing this pain?  

What does success look like for your business?  

What techno logies does your team currently use?  

What CRM do yo u use?  

What’s the averag e sales cycle at your company?  

What’s the relationship like betwee n sales and marke ting?  

Are you the decision-maker on a project like this?  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 10  

“Identify 2-3 pain points that the prospect is experienci ng. Check with them after wards if you’ve understood correctly. Focus on the prospect’s tech stack - chances are, there’s a gap there that your product can fill.”  

Nancy Newman Associate Sales Direct or, Cognism  

&  
Step 3 - Tie everythin  g together  

This is the fun par t!  

Take the 2-3 pain points you’ve unearthed and connect them to a speci fic feature of your product. Now you’ve got a short list of features that you can explain to the prospect.  

Show them how the features will produce benef its - linking the benefits to the goals you identified in Step 1. Tying everythi ng together in this way will help you build up a strong business case.  

“Don’t go through every one of your product’s features. The prospect is only intere sted in the parts that are relev ant to them and their business.”  

William Gay Business Developm ent Manager, Cognism  

The B2B Sales Process Handboo k / 11  
Step 4 - Recap and reaf firm  

At the end of each stage of your discovery call, repeat what you’ve learn ed back to the prospect. Ask them if what you’ve discovered is correct.  

Trust us, it’s far from a pointl ess exercise - doing this means that they might divulge even more in formation that will help you!  

“When your discovery call comes to an end, recom mend the next step but let the prospect decide. It could be a follow-up email or going straight into book ing a product demo. Always set exact timings for whatever the next step will be.”  

Brahm Jagpal Business Develo pment Manager, Cognism  

Bo  nus tip  

“If you’re conducting the call onlin e (which is likely considering recent global eve nts!)  
 - always make sure the video is on! Being able to see each other will help you build rapport much quicker.”\n\nJonathan Ilett Sales Director, Cognism\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Hand book / 12\n3 - Qualification\n\nAfter discovering more about the prospect, it’s ti3me to qualify them. Are they ready to buy from you - yes or no?\n\nSimilar to discove ry, this stage can be conducted on a separate sales call, or as part of the demo prope r.\nWhat is qualification?\n\nIt’s the process of evaluating whether a prospect is a good fit for your product or ser\nvice. At the end of this stage, you should be in a position to judge if the prospect is ready to progress to a demo or pitch.\nWhy is qualifi\ncation important?\n\nYou know as well as we do - all salespeople are fighting against the clo ck.\n\nYou’ve got targets to hit and a finite amount of time in which to hit them. You don’t want to be wasting your time on a prospect that isn’t a ser9ious contender for making a purchase.\n\nThis is why qualification is important - it saves you time and means that you can quickly see if the prospect is a good candi date to be progressed to the demo stage.\n\n~\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Handbook / 13\nHow can you qualify cor rectly?\n\nAt Cognism, we teach our biz dev team to qualify new leads according to the BANT crite ria:\n\nBudget Authority Is the prospect Is the prospe ct willing and able the ultimate to spend? decision-maker? Need Time Does the prospect Is the prospect have a problem looking to that your prod\nuct buy quickly? can solve?\n\nAll of the questions our BDMs ask during qualification are based around these 4 areas.\n\nUse open-ended quest ions to get the prospect talking. These are questio ns that don’t elicit a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ response. They help to get a conversation going. The more inform\nation you get from the prospect, the easier it is to qualify them.\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Handbook / 14\n\nSample questions in clude:\n\nWhat does your curre nt sales strategy look like?\n\nHow does your sales team generate new leads?\n\nWho would normally be involved in buying decisions for new tech?\n\nWhat tools are you currently us ing?\n\nWhat regions are you looking to prospect into?\n\nWhat competitors have you investigated in the past?\n\nWhat did you like about them? What did you dislike?\n\nWhat are your current business growth goals?\n\nAre you in a position to take on new clients righ t now?\n\n“If you find you can’t qualify the pros pect, walk away. Never close a client that you know you won’t be able to deliver to”\n\nBradley Davies Business Development Manager, Cognism\n4 - Demonstration\n\nYou’ve discovered more about the prospect and their pain. You’ve qualified them as a good fit for your product. The next step is all about presen ting your product in a way that satisfies and alleviates their pain.\n\nThis is the demonstration stage.\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Handbook / 15\nDemo struct ure\n\nWe’ve found that most demos last between 30 and 45 minutes. Having a good structure in place means you can keep your eye on the cl\nock. You don’t want to run out of time before you get to the most essential parts.\n\nThis is how we structure our demos at Cognism. Our BDMs weave each section together, creating a single narrative.\n\nThe narrative is that your product can solve the prospect’s pain.\n\nDemo stage 1 min: Intro duction 2 min: Rapport 12–15 min: Discovery 1–2 min: Summary 1–2 min: Agenda 5–10 min: Objection handling 5 min: Feedback 5–8 min: Closing\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Handbook / 16\nDemo notes\n\nOur advi ce is to take notes during your demo. If you don’t, you will for get key points!\n\nCognism’s BDMs use this template for their demo note-taking. Adapt it for your own company’s needs/USP.\n\nCompany overview Brief description of the prospect’s company, its industry and size. Ideal customer profile The industries and job titles that the prospect’s company targets. Current process How the prospect’s company generates new business. Tech stack The main tools used by the prospect’s team. Key hook What are they looking to get out of using the product? Rapport Perso nalised notes/information that could be useful in follow-ups.\nIntroduction and rapport\n\nWhile the introduction and rapport sections should be short and sweet, they are still important. While you want to focus on getting to the next stage quickly, you need to build your nar rative straight from the kick-off. It’s not about making a sale; it’s about selling a fut ure state.\n\nThink back to the 3 steps from the Research stage. What did you find out about your prospect? Have they recently won an award, for example, or been featured in an indust ry publication? Use the intel you have on them to build rapport.\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Handbook / 17\n\nMirroring is a great technique for rapport-building. It’s often taught to cold callers but can be just as eff ective for AEs. Here’s how it works:\n\nListen carefully to how the prospect speaks and the words they use.\n\nThen, imitate the way they talk, using the same words or phrases. Mirroring is a great technique for rapport-building. It’s often taught to cold callers but can be just as effective for AEs. Here’s how it works:\n\nThis tactic has been proven to increa se the odds of being “accepted” by the person you’re talking to. It relaxes the prospect and makes them feel more comfortable talking to you.\n\n“On a demo, you should ideally be speaking for 40% of the time, while the prospect speaks for 60%. If you’re having difficulty get ting your prospect to speak, don’t be afraid to use pauses! They’re a great technique for getting the prospect to talk more. Nobody likes dead air!” -\n\nAlex Shorthose US Senior Business Development Manager, Cognism\nDiscovery\n\nIf you haven’t arranged a separate discovery call, then this is the stage of your demo where you should conduct discovery.\n\nGo back to Stage 2 for our advice on how to handle this. The one thing we will say is: discovery is where deals are won or lost. Take special care in mastering this phase of the B2B sales process.\n\nThe B2B Sales Process Handbook / 18\n\n“Focus on 3 or 4 problems your prospect may be facing. Too few and your prospect won’t believe that you care; too many and you’ll lose focus on your prio rities.”\n\nRichard Murphy US Senior Business Development Manager, Cognism\nSummary\n\nUse this section to demonstrate that you were listening to the prospect’s concerns. You have to show that you under stand their pain points. Repeat the prospect’s pain points back to them and ask them if you have it right.\n\nDoing this is a great method for building credibility and trust with the prospect.\nAgenda\n\nWith this section, set a flow or expectation of what you intend to discuss next. Tell the prospect the features that you would like to show them - but allow them the chance to add to the agenda, if they wish.
The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 19  
5 - Objection handling  

At this s  tage of the B2B sales process, you’ll start demonstrat7ing some product features. Naturally, the prospect will have some objections.  

As we mentioned earlier, Cognism uses the BANT methodology to qualify leads. Most objections you’ll encounter will also confor m to the 4 pillars of BANT.  

This is how you handle them.  

Budget - “I don’t have the mon3ey to buy.”  

First, find out more about the reasons behind the objec tion.  

Is it gen uinely that the price is too high, or is it that the prospect doesn’t see the value of your product for the price they’ll have to pay?  

If it’s that the price is too high, emphasise the value of your product or what makes you different from the competition.  

If they don’t see the v alue, explain how your product will change their life for the better! This could be anything from saving them time or money, or helping them to generate leads and revenue. You have to give the prospect a compelling reason to buy from you.  

A compelling reason needn’t necessarily be based around pricing or cost. It could be anything from certain product features, the level of customer service that your company provides, or customer revi ews.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 20  

Don’t discount  

After all that, if the prospect still has an object ion... try to avoid the tempta tion of going straight to discounting. Doing this can all too quickly de value your product. If the prospect has a pricing objection, there are other things you can suggest instead of taking money off.  

Perhaps consider bes po ke payment terms that help spread the cost of investment, without reducing the overall price.  

Use case studies and testimoni als  

Another strategy for resolving a pricing issue is to bring up some of your company’s success stories. Prove that other orga nisations are achieving results with your platform and that the expenditure is worth it.  

Mention some satisfied custo  mers who work in the same industry as your prospect (this is a very im portant point - whiche ver customers you mention, they must be releva nt to the prospect).  

Always have some suitable case studies and testim onials to hand during your demos.  

Authority - “I’ll have to speak to my boss about this before deci  ding.”  

To handle this objection, start by confirming what the prospect’s con cerns are. Maybe you can provide some information that will stop them from referring their query upwards.  

If you play this right, you can turn the prospect into a ch ampion for your product. They can help you get the buy-in you’ll need from the ultimate decision maker.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 21  

If that doesn’t work, and a third party has to be involved, stay c  alm. Simply arrange a time to speak with them and book it in your diary.  

Need - “We really don’t need your product right now.”  

With this ob jection, you need to get to the root of the problem. What’s stopping them from buying?  

It may be that the prospect loves certain product feat ures, but not others. It may be that they just can’t see (yet!) how your product will help them.  

Two things will assist you here: data and content.  

Data  

Provide the prospect with some data that displays the difference your product can make. We recom mend pulling 2-3 stats or facts to use on your demo.  

Before using them, check that the stats you’ve chosen are rele vant to the prospect’s industry or business. There’s no value in sharing sales statistics with a marketer, for instance, or giving revenue growth data from your enter prise clients to a startup.  

Content  

Make use of the materials produced by your marke ting team (if you have one!).  

Come prepared to the demo with a couple of appropriate customer case studies. If the prospect has a couple of very spec ific questions, maybe you can direct them to a blog or two on your company website.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 22  

Keep up to date with the content your business is publishing and util ise it in your objection handling. If you’re encountering objections that your company’s content can’t solve, then suggest scheduling in a regular meeting between sales and marketing. Share your ideas with the marketing team, so that they’re producing content that moves the needle.  

Timing - “It’s not the right time for us to buy.”  

How you handle this ob jection all boils down to the prospect’s reason for delaying. But whatever their reason is, the most important thing to do is to create a sense of urgency.  

Remind the pros pect of the costs of not buying your product now.  

This is where all the rese arch and information you’ve gained during the early stages of the process will come in handy.  

Use what you’ve learned to turn the objection on its head.  

Here are a few common scen arios from Cognism’s business development play book:  

Scenario  

Action  

The prospect’s compa ny is launching a new prod uct or initiative.  

Your product can help them  

achieve their goals.  

The prospect’s company has recently acquired fun ding.  

Your product is a wise in vestment and can take their business to the next level.  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 23  

The prospect has only recently Your product can help them to  
joined the company. achieve great results and make a big impression early on.  

The prospect’s company had Your product will help them to turn  
a bad quarter. their fortunes around.  

The prospect has to wait for Your product will enable the  
an incoming hire with ultimate decision-maker to become even  
decision-making power. better at their job once they arrive.  

Key takeaway  

The trick is to turn each dis advantage into an advantage.  

The bottom line is - investi gate each objection, ask searching questions, uncover the reason behind each one - and then use the information to handle them effectively.  

“My number one ob jection handling tip? Answer the prospect’s most urgent objection first.”  
“The reason for this is, once you’ve  reso lved that, it makes answering all the other, less troublesome objections much easier. You’ve shown that you can be trusted  and it will make the prospect feel much more certain 67 that you have the solutions they’re looking for.”  

Jonathan Ilett  
Sales Director, Cognism  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 24  
6 - Closing  

This stage of the B2B sales process should be the most exciting part  for the prospect.  

You’ve demonstrated the value of your product, handled all of their objections, and convinced the prospect that your solution is an invest ment which can’t be passed up on.  

Discuss prices and negotiate if necessary. Offer ing some free added value to the deal can help get it over the line.  

Also, be sure to discuss all of the remaining steps before the demo ends. Confirm if there are any other stakeho lders who need to sign-off on the deal. This will en sure that there are no surprising bumps along the way.  

Now the signed contract will be in sight!    

“If there are other stakeholders involved in the decision, and other hoops (legal, IT or procure ment etc.), talk about them at this point.”  

“But above all, get the prospect excited. Make them look forward to using your product.    

After all, you’ve just shown them how it will make their problems disappear!”    

Catherine Gardner  
Business Development Manager, Cognism  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 25  
7 - Follow up  

Congratu  lat ions! You’ve just signed a new customer. But wait - the B2B sales process isn’t over quite yet…    

As soon as the call ends, start formatting your demo notes. Inclu de all the key points you discussed and the agreed next steps. Arrange your notes in a way that works for you and makes it easy to scan for the important 49 infor mation.    

Then, your next task is to compose a follow-up email.  

The message should document everything you and the prospect discussed. Here’s what a good follow-up email should contain:  

How much you enjoyed show ing them your product - keep building that rapport, even at this stage!  

The key points of what you talked about (if possible, include a recording of your demo).  

Clear and concise next steps and timelines for completion.  

Incl ude any extra inform ation at the end of the email.  

« ¢  

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 26  

“Write your follow-up as if it’s going to be read by multiple people. Chances are, it will - on average, there are 7 people involved in any B2B buying decision!”  

“Make it clear, detailed, well-thought-out and professionally written (no grammar errors, no typos).”    

Alex Shorthose  
US Senior Business Development Manager, Cognism  

8 - Feedback    

This is the final step in the B2B sales process, and it happens after the prospect beco mes a customer.  

Give your new customer some time to get to grips with your product and see the value of it. Then, check in with them and ask them for their feedback.    

This is the post-sales questionnaire that our BDMs send to new clients:    

Which words would you use to describe our product?    

How well does our product meet your needs?    

Which 3 featu res are the most valuable to you?    

What are the 3 most important features we’re missing?    

If you could change just one thing about our product, what would it be?    

How would you rate the value for money of our product?    

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 27  

How did using our product compare to your expecta tions?    

Com pared to our competitors, is our product better, worse, or about the same?    

Why did you choose our product rather than a competitor’s?    

On a scale from 0 to 10, how likely are you to recommend our company to others?    

What would you say to someone who asked about us?    

The insights you gain from customer feedback can be in valuable. It impacts 4 key areas of the business:    

Improving the sales process - it demonstrates which features are highly prized by customers.    

Sharpen ing marketing messaging - it gives the marketing team fresh insights into how the product is perceived.    

Proposes product up grades - it highlights which features need to be enhanced or revamped.    

Establishes industry positioning - it gives you a much better idea of where your business sits in the market.    

“If the customer’s feedback says that they’ve been enjoy ing the product, ask them for a case study or referral. This might give you a great new lead to restart the B2B sales process with!”    

Jonathan Ilett  
Sales Director, Cognism    

The B2B Sales Process Handbook / 28  

Contact Cognism today    

So there you have it - the 8 stages of the B2B sales process, ex plained!    

Did you get value from our handbook? If your answer’s yes, connect with us on our social media. We’d love to hear your feedback.    

Cognism is the world’s best B2B prospecting solu tion. Our data and tools can help your sales team to:    

Save time.    

Find new customers quickly.    

Enable faster, more accurate outreach.    

Simplify work  flows.    

...And do all this while being 100% compliant.    

Want to book a demo with us? Simply click the button below. We’re looking forward to starting the B2B sales process with you!    

Request your demo today
